# Compare primary antibody resposnes to flu in ferrets and humans

**Background**

Antigenic distance is widely used to estimate the antigenic novelty of influenza variants, relative to past strains.
Antigenic distance estimates $d_{ij}$ quantify the extent to which antibodies raised in a primary response against strain $i$ cross-react with strain $j$. 

Antigenic distances are usually estimated using titer measurements performed using antisera from ferrets infected with a single strain.
Each ferret generates an antibody response specific to the homologous strain $i$, and then each antiserum is tested agaisnt a panel of heterologous reference strains.
Distances are estimated using multidimensional scaling algorithms, but in esscence, the reflect the expected difference in logtiter to the homologous and heterologous strain: $d_{ij} = s_i - s_j$.

There are two main reasons that individual distances (measured in human sera), and ferret distances could disagree.
First, the intesity or cross-reactive breadth of ferret and human antibody responses against a primary infection may differ, either because of immunological differences between host species, or due to differences between natural infections in humans and experimental infections in ferrets designed to elicit a robust response.
Comparing titer measurements performed using primary ferret and human antisera can help elucidate these differences. 
This comparison is the goal of this analysis.

Second, in humans with complex immune histories, cross-reactivity may differ from that in ferrets infected with a single strain.

## Data

[**Fonville et al. 2016** ](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiv367) analyzed antisera from ferrets infected by a known reference strain, and from human children ages 9-24 months. 
The human antisera were selected from a large number of banked hospital samples.
To maximize the probability of selecting samples taken shortly after primary influenza infections, the authors focused on samples collected during times of peak influenza circulation, and only included samples that were seropositive for an influenza refernece strain that circulated around the time of sample collection.

They identified **6 high-responders** who show high titers to a restricted subset of flu strains, and **11 low-responders** who show lower titers to a broader set of strains.


## Approach

We calculate **individual distances** using sera collected from 17 human children. Individual distance is defined as $d_{ij} = s_i - s_j$, where $s_i$ is the log2 titer to the homologous reference strain, and $s_j$ is the heterologous log2 titer.

We define **ferret distances** in two ways:

* Pairwise Euclidean distances between strains in the antigenic map generated by [Fonville et al. 2016](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiv367) using ferret reference sera. These distances were extracted from their Fig. 3A using image analysis software.
* Pairwise log2 titer distances measured in ferrets, $d_{ij} = s_i - s_j$, which are provided in their Supplementary Dataset 3.

## raw_data files

* `jiv367supp_...` are files downloaded directly from the supplementary materials of [Fonville et al. 2016](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiv367).

    * `jiv367supp.pdf` contains detailed methods, figure legends, and dataset legends.
    *  `jiv367supp_tables.xlsx` contains the data.
        
        
* `human_titers_Dataset_S2.csv` is a .csv copy of their Dataset S2 (extracted from the .xlsx file).
* `ferret_titers_Dataset_S3.csv` is a .csv copy of their Dataset S3 (extracted from the .xlsx file).

Their description of each data fie is copied below:

>Supporting Dataset Legends:
> Dataset   S1: The   season;   corresponding   weeks   of influenza   A/H3N2 incidence   exceeding   10   cases   of   influenza-like-illness(ILI)per   10.000 inhabitants  in  the  Netherlands[19–21,39–53];the  sample selection window based on 2 weeks around the epidemic interval; and the virus used to screen for influenzavirus-positive samples.
>Dataset  S2:Sample  information,  screening  titers  and  full  hemagglutination inhibition (HI) data set of titers against 23 test viruses of all 17 influenza virus-positive children’s sera.
>DatasetS3:HI titers of 24 ferret sera to the 23 test viruses.
>DatasetS4:Thesubset  of  the  HI  table  used  to  calculate  the  antigenic  map based on the high-responding human sera (Figure 2).
>DatasetS5:The subset of the HI table used to calculate the antigenic map of ferret sera in Figure 3using the same subset of viruses as DatasetS4.
>DatasetS6:The  subset  of  the  HI  table  used  to  calculate  the  antigenic  map based  on  all  human  sera  that  had  at  least  one  titer  of  240  or  higher  (Figure 4A, B). 
>DatasetS7:The subset of the HI table used to calculate the antigenic map of ferret sera in Figure 4C, Dusing the same subset of viruses as DatasetS6.


## processed_data files

* `kg_scraped_ferret_coordinates_Fig3.csv` are estimates of the antigen coordinates of each strain in their Fig. 3A, extracted by hand using image analysis software.
